Certainly we're not going to talk to you.
I'm Michael Doris.
I'm going to be right here in Boston.
I don't see the point of discussing the novel because that certainly speaks eloquently enough for itself.
But I guess I am interested, as everybody is interested, in this collaborative work of art.
Certainly writing a novel is traditionally, historically, I cannot think of many instances where
more than one mind comes together to produce a novel.
I mean, or any number of other works.
Maybe we could talk about, and I certainly know that you've worked together also.
I don't know what word you would use as consulting each other.
Well, more than that.
We've had a kind of collaborative relationship all along in the novels.
The person whose name is going to be on the book writes
the graphs, but they get passed back and forth all through the process, and the other person is very free to say, this isn't working, this is working, why don't you move the direction of the book here, scrap this.
It's more than an editor because it forms it as it's going along.
I think most editors, you wait until the book is finished and you turn it in, and then they make suggestions, but in this case,
It's a word-by-word kind of thing, and we talk about the characters before anything is written, have a general sense of the book, and then it surprises the writer as he or she goes along, but that surprise is then shared on a daily basis, usually.
But each of us write in separate rooms, and that was true for this book as well, except that we were both
producing the initial text in about the same way.
Are you writing at the same time?
I mean, even though you have different voices and you kind of alternate voices, obviously,
Can you write your segment?
You have to wait for Michael's segment.
No, no.
If you go, we work backwards.
It's like putting both together when you're writing a linear book.
And we figure out a plot in any number of ways.
As we're going along, something suggests itself, or we're taking a walk and we get an idea.
the character, what's going to happen.
One of us just has inspiration and just starts writing it and brings it to the other end and says, this is what happened.
Which the other person might disagree with.
No, no, this isn't working.
But it doesn't happen that often that one of us really thinks the character is going some particular way.
So the novel is pretty thoroughly applied.
Well, it's very fluid.
It's hard to describe this because there's no real technique that I think we haven't really quantified this.
Let's say we think it is heavily plotted at first and then it never turns out to be what we expected it to be because at a certain point you get to know your characters so well that you just simply drop them into a situation and instead of them doing something predictable, they do something unpredictable because they are who they are and you have to kind of follow them.
rather than confine them.
Do you think as one writer here, or are you two different, is it a synergistic kind of thing?
Yeah, I don't think we think as one person.
I mean, I think that we think as a couple of individuals who really have a booking line and who try to work.
I mean, we don't have, we don't know what the other person is going to come up with.
I think somehow this is really easier in a first-person narrative novel like this is, like our others have been, because it really is the characters who are operating, and we invest the characters.
But once they're in place, when you're doing only a first person, they can only know what they know, and they can only react as they would react, and you don't have the kind of omniscience that maybe an overreaching single-voiced person would have.
because there is this other character besides us involved, and that is Vivian Two Star, Roger Williams, or Nash.
Whatever we may want from them, they are defined by their history, by their history that has been created for them.
Do you have any word to describe what you've done here?
How would you describe the product?
What would you call it?
This book?
It is different, as a literary one.
How many novels that are treated as literary works are done by more than one person?
I think that rather than say it's different because that happens, you have to start by saying is it different because it's different.
I think this book is different because we intended to violate all sorts of conventions.
Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.: Male Speaker 1.:
that is put in very consciously right at the moment when you expect the action to unfold.
And the point of all of that, I think, for us, and these were conscious choices, we tried writing this novel in many different ways, in the voice of Columbus, in a sort of historical way, intermittent Columbus and the present and everything.
I think that the intent was to reflect the chaos of discovery.
When two people or two cultures are coming to encounter with each other, they don't know what's going to happen next.
It's full of surprise and accidents and anecdotes and aggression and all of that kind of stuff.
The poem is finally a way for the historical voice to assert itself.
And also, it proves that Roger is who he says he is, that he really can write a poem, and proves that he's in the cave a long time.
One more thing that I'll shut up today.
The poem, we got very fond of Roger in the course of this book.
And we thought, what would he do with this poem?
And we thought he'd want it to be published in a classy literary journal.
Caliban came to mind because of The Tempest, of course.
And so we sent it to them, and it's in the current Caliban under Roger Williams.
We submitted it as Roger's poem, and so that was our, that was his proudest accomplishment.
Would you call this an experiment, an experimental work, or was it just a natural progression from the kinds of things we've done together in the past?
I think it's a natural progression.
I don't... I guess when something has...
The word experimental attached to it, you think it's just going to be... It's not going to be a good story.
It's not going to be a story, yeah.
It's going to be a good storytelling as much as anything else, I think.
It is a natural progression.
It's still personal voices, and it's still...
Although I think one thing that's very different is this little story that frames it, and we use this very small story of the girl finding the baby, what it means to lose the baby, to hurt it, and to frame it.
the whole big story, the little hook ends for the rest of the story.
Of course, discovery, as Michael pointed out, is certainly the spark as we approach the 500th anniversary.
I'm just curious about the creator of Wellsprings and this thing.
Were we thinking about 1492 and 1992?
Ten years we've worked on this book.
Ten years, that's an important piece of information.
Well, I mean, not constantly.
Obviously, we've turned other things in in the meantime, but we were taking a trip ten years ago and stopped in a little town in a rainstorm and went to the library until afternoon.
You love this library.
It was a little underground library in North Dakota.
You've walked down this little basement steps.
Of course, nobody in there.
You just checked out your own books.
There was only about 200 people in the town.
It was under a book store.
It was sort of irresistible.
Minnowak and the U Library.
There on the table is Los Passos' Columbus translation or excerpts.
This is about 10 years ago.
Yes, about 81.
We started reading it.
I think we both probably had a vague idea of Columbus.
maybe even glanced at it before, but in the downpour outside and the kind of enforced reading room sense, it was like Vivian in a way.
She was trapped in a library and discovered it.
We got interested in him as a character because Las Casas
reproduces only certain parts of the diary for his own political agenda.
But there's these big gaps.
First, there's this guy who is a utopian who sees the first Native people and who thinks they're beautiful and gentle and guileless.
And yes, they make good servants, but clearly they're human beings.
And then Las Casas leaves out stuff.
And then the next thing we know, and later on, he's bringing them back as slaves.
and becomes the first slavery of the Western Hemisphere.
What happened, basically?
What happened psychologically?
What happened historically?
There just were gaps.
Then we started figuring out who Columbus was and found out that he kept lots of diaries.
Each of them was like the vanilla ice of his day.
He told a different story to every person he was talking to.
Very self-conscious.
master of himself because he probably had something to hide.
Probably he was son of conversos or he was this or he was that.
We haven't figured out who he was.
But anybody who has that many faces is an interesting character.
His son was a collector.
Columbus decided to respond to a lot of them.
You mean was Nick Ferdinand?
Yeah, I think so.
Somebody mentioned actually the other day, and I should look at Columbus's son, but the reason is that perhaps a lot of what we know of Columbus as a result of
It is.
It's what the son chose to keep and then keep.
Oh, that's a whole interesting story in itself.
What happened to his papers and the squabble.
He never kind of stepped it up.
None of his stuff.
I mean, the wonderful thing about this and what is so intriguing once you start to think about the actual viaries is how they were lost and how...
One story which may or may not be true is that after Columbus brought the first diary and gave it to Isabel, and she had a copy, a Barcelona copy made, given back to Columbus, she kept the original and it was not seen after she died.
And one of the stories is that when Napoleon invaded Silantres and quartered his army,
around the castle.
The whole library was taken out.
The man out of Sprawn used to bed the horses.
And it probably was pitched out with the... And the other thing that happened was he used diaries on the second voyage.
He ran into a terrible gale coming back.
and wrapped them very carefully in an oil closet.
And there was this wonderful discovery name.
Well, someone claimed to have discovery for those long ago.
It's just wonderful stuff.
There are a number of cases in history where we have stories.
Not unlikely.
Yes.
And so some of them finally boiled up.
The only problem was, it was this big discovery, but they were all written in English.
The other funny thing that happened with this book, which happened all along, is that we would think we were making something up.
And then further research would yield that it was not plausible.
They don't want to give away the crown of thorns, but the crown of thorns really was something called the crown of thorns.
It was bouncing around Europe at that time, we later discovered.
We had thought of the crown of thorns before we knew anything about it as a metaphor.
And the Saint-Chapelle was built to be the jewel box for it.
And then it was in the possession of Genoese sailors.
They're bringing it.
They're going to bring us a snack.
Actually, I got you some notes.
No, no, go ahead.
She's never been with me.
I've done about 500, 600 interviews.
This is the very first time she's ever been on.
I'm so glad you came along.
It's very interesting that this project was conceived ten years ago, and then in the interim, you've done three novels a year old, you've done two or three books a year old.
So let's talk a little bit about that.
I guess we work that way.
You know, you get an idea for something and it just kicks around and stays there for a long time.
And I can go back to my notebook and find the title of the book I'm looking at now.
I thought of when I was
over in Alston, here, which was 15 years ago.
And I was just having to look through some old notebooks and realize that's how long things take to get through the psychological process or however it works.
It takes a long time.
And I tend to work in little increments and I think we both work
You know, we worked slowly through to come up.
The idea gathers and collects weight and we had to read a book here and take one down there.
And one of the things we did to try and get a sense of Columbus was read what he read.
Because his print had kept his library.
That was beautifully kept.
With wonderful notes that Columbus had made in the margins.
with his Bible and St.
Gustin.
That's a picture of a question you get in the right book.
That kind of detail should really be in my book.
It's wonderful.
My book is coming out next year.
That's 92?
Yeah.
Oh, yeah.
Oh, that's great.
That wonderful, um, Wondersar that he, in all of his purposes, would see, Wonders as God in the Depths, I think he wrote that in a little bit of a margin of, you know, only.
The most important part of my book is how collectors,
I mean, we're obsessed, of course, but in the process, you preserve the product of achievements, human, whatever, you know.
I have any number of very interesting little stories that you mention, you know, all the stuff overboard.
And the Linda's Fine Gospels, and, you know, when they sacked the monastery in the 1500s, they stole that, and they took that for the
for the binding, which was actually, and then they discarded the book, and the book was rescued, and then there's a story about it actually being seen floating in the water.
I guess while it was still in this extraordinary binding, it was saved, and of course you go into the British Library, and it was surrounded by... Floating in the water?
Yeah, yes, and I'll have to find out precisely how that came to that, but I mean, it's, you know, this magnificent illuminated manuscript going to the British Library, it's number two or three there,
It's a collector who grabbed it and saved it.
We read and reviewed it.
We read and reviewed a book on the Cosmo ghetto in Lithuania about a year ago, I guess it was.
That was a fascinating story because what the man did is kept the secretary of the ghetto council, kept the meticulous journal,
He put in all of the orders that the Nazis had, which were these little instrumental things, the daily things that Jews may not have, tropical fish or cats or something like that.
You see the accumulation of the horror that's going on.
Next to, Jewish women may not be pregnant.
Right.
What was this again?
It's the Kavno Ghetto Diary.
It's something the Holocaust survived.
How do you spell it?
It's K-O-V-N-O.
I think it's Surviving the Holocaust.
It's Harvard Press, isn't it?
Harvard Press?
I'll check it out.
The story is that when it was clear that the ghetto was going to be destroyed, he buried all of these papers in the foundation of a building that was buried.
He ran off to the partisans.
The ghetto was completely destroyed.
Everybody was gone.
It was bombed and everything.
And then he and that four or five others came back after the war and dug up the foundation and strapped parts of these diaries to their bodies and then split up through Europe to meet in Palestine and put it together.
And some of them didn't make it, and so there are holes in it, and put it back together again.
But it was remarkable how much of it created.
you know, the transmission of documents, not just collecting.
And it's a whole other story of the Holocaust, because it is this very minute, daily... Where did you run across this?
We reviewed it.
We reviewed it for the Chicago Review, and I reviewed it for Newsday.
And when was it published?
Last year.
Harvard Press, you think?
I'll find it.
It's easy to do.
I'm trying not to ask you this.
I've got a whole plan on your interviews, and I know that people are asking me the same things over and over again, and I have that material to drop on, so if it seems like I'm not covering the obvious, it's because I have so much.
Oh, thank you.
I was with Kitty Kelly the day before yesterday, you know, on the Reagan book.
The title of my book is A Gentle Madness.
I'll send it to you.
In fact, give me your address and I'll make sure.
I was going to bring a copy today.
Box 70.
Cornish Blast.
N.H.
Yeah, here's a fun little piece.
And is it going to be part of the film?
Not really.
I did it as a lot of the stuff that's in there.
I mean, I started with Henry Huntington in 1911.
I went to the University of Texas.
And all the sales I went to in New York and I brought those in.
I mean, it's really a mishmash.
but with a theme, you know, this madness to acquire and collect.
So what are you working on next?
Are you going to continue this kind of collaboration, do you think?
I don't think so.
At least I don't think the next ones are going to be.
What you are is separate.
Well, we have separate corners, anyway.
And we started working on that.
books that have a lot more... They just aren't collaborative.
I can't define why this particular one was, and why these aren't.
You do work in separate parts of the house?
Sure do.
One week, in fact I wrote these two together, I had to do it.
Michael Holroyd and Margaret Gravel were following each other, like within days.
They both had books on her at the same time with different publishing houses.
One was a random house and the other was a Viking.
And I said, gee, you know, you're going to the same cities.
Why couldn't the two houses get together?
And they said, believe me, we went through this.
They thought Viking, you know, thought that maybe Michael would get more attention than the other one thought.
You know, they each had their own agenda to pursue.
So they had to, they basically,
followed each other by three or four days.
So at the end of the whole writing interview, he said, will you see Margaret?
He said, say hello to Margaret.
But then I had to write the two together.
But you know, they actually write in different houses, different parts of London.
They find that they have to really be separate to produce.
And I guess in your cases, it's
When it really comes down to the point of creation, that's where you go by yourself.
Is that a fair initial creation?
We go back and forth with the drafts currently a lot, and we read the books aloud to each other a couple of times before they go out, and changes get made at that point.
As with dialogue, we try out with each other and that kind of thing.
And then every day we rendezvous for a long walk and check out what has happened.
You won't believe what so-and-so just did today, you know, kind of thing.
On ideal days.
On ideal days without PTA meeting dentists.
Are you working along parallel courses, do you think?
I mean, are you ahead of Michael or are you ahead of Louise?
We work at different hours, too, sometimes, so I might be working part of the day, and Michael thinks, you know, I'm usually sleeping in my great work, and Michael's very wonderfully early rising, but, um... The best time.
The earlier, the better, it's made to improve the lifestyle.
I can get night's sleep to get started.
Do you like to work in the evening?
Well, I'm in the morning, but I just don't get up at 10 or 4.
3 o'clock?
Well, when I'm cooking, when it's really in there.
But we have a lot of kids, so we have to fit it in.
There's not a lot of time for...
fooling around.
I asked Louise, who had stepped away, about continuing this kind of collaboration.
And she said, well, perhaps, but not right now.
Is that... Yeah, I think if the subject would equally grab us, and we were... I mean, we had to wait a long time for us both to have...
to be between the other books to do this together.
There was nothing in this that would discourage us from doing it again.
The book was writing.
It was a lot of fun.
I think also you had to establish your own identities first.
That's probably true.
Yeah.
I mean, a collaborative book from two unknowns is not going to make it.
But now, of course, with the solid reputations that you have,
well-earned and newly recognized.
Maybe it's more of an acceptable... I don't know.
I think that would be a tough one to start with.
It would.
You're right.
And it also would be impossible to write to start with.
We had to work towards having...
giving up some of that ego attachment to the individual book.
But I think your readers have to know who the authors are for this kind of book.
I think that's a fair assessment.
It certainly helps.
You come with baggage, which is positive.
The perception of the two of you is excellent.
And so you start with that.
I don't know if that's a fair assessment.
Well, you know, but the other thing is, I think too much can be made that we work together about, you know.
I mean, a lot is made of it.
Well, I know, and I think that... But, you know, that's interesting.
And some people write in the nude, and some people do this, and some people do this.
But what ultimately matters is books.
And, you know, our...
I mean, clearly what we wanted is for somebody to pick up this book and read it and take it as a book.
I mean, it was unusual that in Yellow Rattle, I wrote in the voice of three women, you know, and I'm not a woman.
Well, that's an unusual thing.
But people read the book and that isn't what they're thinking about all the way through.
Or if it is, then it's not done well.
And if they read this book and they think all the way through, this must have been written by two different people, then... Not necessarily, yeah, because, and that's a question I should have brought up, but it just seems so obvious, because the two of you do write in so many different voices in the same work.
I mean, Love, Medicine, there's so many voices in page 7, 8, 9, I forget, you know, it was expressed, and I mean, every one of them worked.
You know, we had young students and old people, we had that, and we had that, and we had that.
That's really difficult, isn't it, writing on the voice of the opposite sex, or is it?
It's not that voice is really speaking.
It isn't any harder.
I know Mary Gordon has said to me the reason she doesn't write about men is because she can't really do it.
I mean, she says she feels very uncomfortable.
trying to entail sexuality is her phrase.
I think it probably has to do with the way you grow up in your family.
Michael grew up with women, I grew up in a real mixture, but with very strong attachments to uncles, father, brothers.
And you internalize things about, for me, about men that don't seem
at all out of my experience.
I'm very felt with my dad or whatever, you know, so that stuff doesn't seem out of my grasp.
And I have, I guess, an intense sympathy for men that I might not have if I never experienced what it was to have to help a little brother out or something.
So, I really think it's how you are formed in a family and who you're close to.
Are you working on love now?
Are you working on anything now?
Oh, yeah.
It's called Heels of Burning Love.
And it's a book about...
It's a collection of stories, but here's how they get told.
It's about a group of women who like to go out and play blackjack, gambling as legal happens.
And they get stuck in a blizzard in a car.
They get stuck overnight, and in order to keep themselves alive, really, each one has to tell the tale of burning love about themselves that will keep the others awake.
So as you fall asleep, you freeze to death.
So each one of them has to come up with something.
And they have to be a certain length, because every 45 minutes you have to go out and knock the snow out of the exhaust pipe.
It's that kind of, you know,
We travel... Drawing the stories along.
And do you talk this over with, Michael?
Oh, yes.
It's more than talk over.
We work on the manuscript.
Really?
Sure.
And how about yourself?
What are you working on?
A novel called The Dark Snake.
And it is about how a single act of revenge works its way through several generations.
Old woman who...
has two sons and the younger one is killed and she decides her allegiances to him and that that decision affects the life of her other son and his children and their children over the course of the next 30-40 years.
Talk to me about, and it's so obvious, but talk to me about the importance of voice in all these various works, and how do you contribute to the formation of the articulation of the voice of whatever.
I mean, voice is such an important element in all of the books, even in the non-fiction book.
It's a non-fiction work, but yet it's written in literary skills.
Yes.
Here we go.
Thank you.
Okay.
All right.
First, some milk.
Oh, good.
One of the books that you read, the only copy in North America is at Williams.
Williams has a great collection.
And so, you know, this is neat to see it.
Right, the Charles Letters.
He was...
The books are the clue to he couldn't be who he says he was, because he portrays himself as this mercenary, illiterate, who was washed overboard and held onto a spar very melodramatically and washed onto the shore of Portugal, and the rest is history.
Then he starts reading, within a couple of years, all of these books, and Latin, and Pauli, and Esgras, and St.
Augustine, and everything like that.
It couldn't be that this person had no background.
Of course, everybody, me, every educated person thought the world was round in those days, but Columbus's
gimmick, that the world was rather small, so that this was a vast route.
And the thing about him that also is interesting as a character, and almost as a comic character, you go with Bergson's notion of what is comedy.
Comedy is rigidity.
Columbus was absolutely rigid.
Once he made up his mind what he was going to find, it had to be that.
And he went through his grave insisting that this was Japan.
All evidence to the contrary.
And so, in a sense, it makes him a tragic figure, but it also makes him kind of a comic figure, because he couldn't see what was there, even though what was there was better than what he thought he was looking for.
And so when we do our Columbus, modern-day Columbus, at Vivian and Nash,
and Roger and so forth, each with their various quests and so forth.
The question for them is, do you have to be that rich?
Do you have to insist that what you find is what you expect?
And the thing that we got very fond of Roger about is that he is able to change.
I mean, he moves from this very tight, self-protective, terrified, a payoff guy,
and to a person who can achieve a spontaneous Adam.
And Vivian believes her own blood, finally.
And that is her progress.
And Nash grows up.
Thank God.
That's another thing.
The love story was, again, part of the storytelling that he thought of.
He had this challenge.
I think the only other thing I would say, and you asked a question before about whether this was an experiment
In a way, each of our books have been an experiment.
I mean, the cardinal rule that we have followed from the beginning is that we don't replicate the previous book, and that we take some risks.
And, you know, The Beat Queen was a real departure for blood medicine, and Trax was a departure for The Beat Queen, and Gallagher was a departure for the others, and Book of Courage, and this, so that every book
that's come along after the first one, people have said, you didn't write the previous book.
Yeah.
That's the idea.
Well, the book could actually be something almost because you had to write it.
I don't know if that's part of the progression.
I think it's part of the progression because of exactly what you said about it, and that is that it is written in a certain way.
I mean, because it is a literary work.
It's a literary work.
I mean, it could have been an article.
in that sense, in terms of what I had to write to find that information.
But we really, it was a story.
It was a story that had these reverberations every day.
I still get, or we still get, maybe four letters a day.
And they're the kind of letters that you have to answer because
They're people who have just discovered that the last 20 years of their lives hadn't been their fault, I think.
The reason I don't have that with me for you to describe it, by the way, is that somebody's... No.
Well, books have to be read, too.
I think that's pretty important.
You know, you go into these libraries and the books can't be touched.
I mean, they really can't.
But on the other hand, I know I mentioned Roger Strader.
He has books with engravings in them, and they are really reaching a point where, like watercolors, you can only allow them so much time
you know, every year, every ten years in the sunlight because they have books where they are now actually a portion of time because exposure will destroy them.
What about this Grudenberg Bible?
Isn't that something that every time
Is it just someone who's also taking away the life of it?
I don't think the Bible.
The Gutenberg Bible is a great example of where the first was the best.
Really?
The printing is magnificent.
It's acid-free paper.
There's no boxing in it.
You look at it and you'd swear it was done yesterday.
Of course, you guys keep a block in a vault.
You swear it was done yesterday?
You've seen Gutenberg Bibles.
They have one of the Library of Congress over here in Ireland.
Yale has one.
No one might laugh.
Well, he actually felt the illuminations.
Oh.
He knows.
He is so wonderful.
This guy's a scholar.